Well, you probably already saw my video
from earlier uh talking about the
decision that was handed down by the
Supreme Court of Norway. And in this
video, we're going to get into the nuts
and bolts of that. I try and put on a
brave face for for people, for the
community, I suppose, and maybe just for
myself. I'll be completely honest with
you, but this sucks. It is always
difficult to be reminded that big
corporations and large entities
um that can pay for the greatest lawyers
uh that money can buy um they don't play
by the same rules as you are not you and
I. If we break the rules, if we make an
oopsie and get into some legal trouble,
we will probably face, you know, rather
harsh consequences for any misactions
that we took. Whereas large entities,
you know, the Epsteines of the world,
the the the the DuPont chemicals of the
world, they they just don't
they they are just able to find legal
remedies for all of these situations.
And it's really frustrating because it
feels like there's no justice or sanity.
Um but that's why I like to look at
things as, you know, this is not a
justice system. It's a legal system at
the end of the day. And so I guess
they're just doing what? Yeah, I don't
even know because like reading through
this it's like they're just flat out
wrong in some of the conclusions that
they're making. Like they are just
objectively wrong. But one thing I guess
before I go into this it's important to
remember at least for myself is there
are big regional differences in
Jehovah's Witnesses. I remember when I
got married she was from the
Netherlands, never lived in America. And
so I that was the first time that I
really came to understand that there it
was a different religion almost
altogether. A lot of the weird little
rules and and quirks and idiosyncratic
uh things that would go on in
congregations here in America just
weren't a thing over in the Netherlands.
So there are a lot of regional
differences. And so I think it's
something to remember at least that when
we're looking at it from an outsers's
perspective, not an outsiders cuz we're
all, you know, maybe for former
Jehovah's Witnesses, but an outsider of
like what the actual regional
differences are with Jehovah's
Witnesses. And I'll get back to that
later because I do think that they do
say something that is kind of
interesting and I think did inform to a
certain extent a lot of their decision
even though I think it's kind of crap.
Anyway, I'm just kind of rambling on at
this point. Um, I uh I didn't actually
get any sleep last night. And I've tried
to go back to bed, but it didn't really
work out. And I decided I'm going going
to go hiking. I'm going to go over to a
Point of Arches, Shishi Beach, over on
the Washington coast uh this afternoon
and probably spend the night just
staring at the waves and reggrounding
myself, touching grass as the kids say.
But anyway, I've yapped along enough.
Let's run the intro.
So, this document starts by just talking
about some of the timeline that went on
here, the reasons why. I think I've made
more videos about this one subject than
any other one subject. So, if you need
to get caught up on to speed, boy howdy,
hey, you could probably spend about the
next 10 to 15 hours just listening to me
detail all of the things that happened
in this case. Uh, one thing that I do
think it is important to remember um is
that
the Jehovah's Witnesses were the only uh
religion that was dregistered and refuse
state subsidies of the 724 that did. And
I do think again just trying to think of
this as not a justice system, not doing
what's right, but as a legal system. I
think that must weigh kind of heavily on
the the mind of the judges is like why
are we, you know, picking them out
exclusively, which I think is garbage to
be completely frank with you because
everything should be evaluated on its
own merit. I don't think that it should
even enter into the conversation that
they're the only ones that were denied
state subsidies. That's just not how how
logic works. Each argument needs to be
evaluated with its on its own merit and
not just be like, well, we can't be that
bad. Look, there's all these other
people and they didn't get denied
subsidies. Yeah, well, they don't have
the rules you do. They don't exercise
the control that you do. You don't. So
that's a bit of a frustration, but I can
convince myself that there's a world
where, you know, a legal legal squad
would maybe have that as a
consideration, which obviously they did
cuz they wrote it in here. Now they go
and talk about their understanding of
the Jehovah's Witness religion. And in
point 36, it is only at baptism at
baptism that one becomes a Jehovah's
Witness and receives the status of a
member. Jehovah's Witnesses practice
both adult and minor baptisms, but not
infant baptisms. Minors who are baptized
are usually between the ages of 15 and
18. Although there are examples of the
baptism of younger children, a child
between the ages of 11 and 15 could
alternatively become a so-called
unbaptized publisher. This just isn't
again, I don't know what goes on in
Norway. I wasn't there. I don't have
their numbers. So maybe this is the
typical case. Maybe they had a very
selective survey. I don't know if they
asked, hey, can you provide some baptism
numbers? And there was a little bit of
of gerrymandering going on here where
it's a little bit like the election
cycle. How can we move these these
county lines in such a way where we can
we can try and cook the books a little
bit? I don't really know. But whenever I
talk to people, whenever I I think I
even made a poll one time on the channel
talking about what age people were
baptized, and the majority of people
were baptized before they were 15. It
was I can't remember the exact
percentage, but I think it was like
something like 57%
and
there I think the smallest Well, no.
Yeah, cuz I had it broken down was like
57% were like between
uh like 14 and 16. I I can't even
remember. And then below that, you know,
like 10 to to 14 was a higher
percentage. Anyway, what I'm getting at
is it's something like 60% or something
like that. And experientially,
just growing up in this thing, like 70%
of people were baptized before 15 and
certainly 18. So this just doesn't seem
like it matches reality, but it for
whatever reason that's what they think
is is the case. Furthermore, the person
must have sufficient maturity to be able
to make a independent decision to be
baptized. This is crap. This is actual
garbage nonsense. Prior to the baptism,
the elders of the congregation will
conduct a conversation with the person
concerned to make sure the candidates is
both sufficiently mature and understands
the obligations that come with becoming
a Jehovah's Witness. If it is a minor,
the parents are usually present during
the conversation. There are, I would
say, a majority of people again that
grow up in the organization that don't
understand how shunning worked.
you can give the answers like they'll
they'll study the little book with
someone, right? And and they say, "Okay,
well, they have these conversations with
them." These aren't conversations. The
the child is given a book that they're
meant to study. There are questions that
they are meant to answer. So, this is a
question and answer format, not a
conversation, where they tell them what
to say. Read this paragraph. Here's the
question that you have to answer. Can
you find the answer?
And if you get stuff wrong, which I did
when I was going over my baptism
questions, when I didn't understand a
teaching, when I didn't know something,
that didn't actually matter. They just
said, "Oh, well, you know, you'll figure
it out a little bit later. When you get
older, you'll understand it." This is
actual garbage nonsense. You cannot
convince me. You cannot that most
Jehovah's Witnesses are typically
baptized between 15 and 18 and that all
of them have sufficient maturity to
understand the decision that they're
making. I would give I would point you
to the XJW community and ask them just
ask them honestly did you know what you
were getting into when you got baptized?
And I promise you, the majority of
people will say, "I had no idea that the
consequences for my actions or if
finding out that the organization was
wrong about something that I just didn't
agree with or if the organization move
the goalposts and they said, "Hey, this
whole thing that we've been telling you
about this generation will not pass away
before the end of the system. Actually,
just kidding. Uh, I know you got
baptized with an understanding that that
was the doctrine, but now we've changed
the doctrine.
Sorry, you're still baptized as a
Jehovah's Witness. There is not a world
where this makes any modum of sense.
Uh, number 41. The members of the
religious community must therefore not
associate with former members, neither
excluded nor dregistered. This also
applies to close relatives unless they
belong to the same household. Family
ties are not broken, but family members
other than those who live
those you live with are only allowed to
have contact in necessary family
matters. It is undisputed that the
threshold for such contact is relatively
high. So they do acknowledge that this
is like the dynamic that they do have
that you know there is this threshold
for contact if you're outside of the
family that is relatively high. But in
their minds this didn't really matter.
It didn't actually push it over the
threshold for what the government was
willing to do as far as interference in
the religious lives of Jehovah's
Witnesses goes. So, it's not saying that
Jehovah's Witnesses don't shun people.
It's not saying that the the the current
shunning policy is totally hunky dory
and okay, and we give it a big old gold
star and a thumbs up. My left butt
cheek. This is only saying that it
didn't meet a legal threshold. That's
it. So now this is the section that's
really breaking down how they came to
their um conclusion. So we'll read a
little bit more here. Uh starting in 87,
the preparations seem to be based on the
premise that children have statutory
protection against negative social
control. The convention of the rights of
the child does not express expressly set
out such a right. But in my view,
serious forms of negative social control
could be covered by other provisions. In
particular, the protection against
psychological violence, which I have
just reviewed. I cannot see that a ban
on negative social control is included
in Norwegian language in general. Uh the
legislative committee discussed whether
a ban on negative social control should
be introduced in section 30 of the
children's act. The majority concluded
that there is neither a need for this.
There is neither a need for nor is it
appropriate to introduce such a ban in
the law. The reasoning was that it will
not be possible to draw clear legal
boundaries for when the parents social
control over a child is within or
outside what parents can do by virtue of
parental responsibility.
So, this was one of the more
disappointing um aspects of of reading
through this, the fact that they didn't
really think that, okay, well, maybe it
didn't work. You know, what the state
was saying doesn't work with how the law
is written currently. So, maybe we do
need to, you know, we'll give Jehovah's
Witnesses a pass, but we need to re
re-evaluate this law and maybe rewrite
it. What they said is that the majority
concluded that there is not a need and
it's not appropriate to introduce a new
law like this. So that's that's a little
bit disappointing because I feel like
this kind of kills it pretty much
totally. But obviously, you know,
there's there's it's never really the
end when it comes to the these things
because what this does is it gets
awareness. This made it all the way to
the Supreme Court people. Like that's a
big deal. Just making it that far is a
big deal. The fact that it was a 3-2
split shows that this was very close,
even within just that legal framework,
it was still very close to be
interpreted as Jehovah's Witnesses were
breaking the law. I mean, it could not
have been any closer, honestly. So, but
that that particular uh sentence right
there, hope maybe it's just an English
translation thing, but that one was a
little disheartening. I'm not a lawyer
either, so I could be like mis misharing
what they're actually saying, but I
don't think I am. Uh 93. There's neither
evidence nor evidence that a minor's
decision to be baptized is not based on
informed and independent choices. Uh
again, my left butt cheek. Baptisms
require a good knowledge of the Bible
and the religious community central
teachings and the congregation elders
must assess whether the person concerned
has the necessary maturity and
understanding of the obligation baptism
entails. It must therefore
it must therefore be assumed that the
minor is also aware of consequences of
opting out or being excluded from
Jehovah's Witnesses. And I feel like how
they have come to this where they say,
"Well, most people, you know, are
between 15 and 18." And
someone, you know, between 15 and 18,
they're probably have a fairly decent
grasp on what's going on around them. I
I I imagine that a 17-year-old that's
getting baptized is going to be familiar
with dysfellowshipping. It probably
would have happened to people they know,
uh, friends or family, and so they would
have actually seen it in in practice.
Whereas if you are 10 or 11, you have
you're like still licking licking walls
and and playing in sandboxes, you know,
like you can't tell me that a snot-nosed
bedwedding child has sufficient maturity
and we're going to trust the elders in
their assessment of things.
That's just ridiculous. Again, in my
opinion, that's just an insane insane
way to look at it. But if you are
operating under the assumption that the
age group that where most people are
baptized is that I could see how maybe
you'd come to that conclusion. Uh 95. It
is undisputed by the state that the
religious community will follow these
guidelines. Oh yeah. So, this is talking
about the new guidelines that they
introduced where they had the
clarification in the now infamous August
2024 Watchtower where they made
adjustments to the shunning policy
despite Tony Morris saying that they
wouldn't. This is it worked.
This was the thing that I think I
had feared, I had hoped against, and at
the time it appeared it wasn't going to
work, but it looks like it did in fact
work. Them making that change has
informed the Supreme Court's decision.
they bring it up in here. So, I can only
assume that, you know, this is part of
the the the factors that went into
making the conclusion that they did. Uh,
here in 97, an exclusion thus does not
break family ties. A minor will also
normally live in a parental home. The
family's normal everyday activity can
continue, but a central part of the
family's spiritual,
that is, religious life and interaction
will no longer be available to the
excluded minor after an exclusion. And
at the same time same time, the creed
provides instruction on how to look
after the minor's family life, including
emotionally.
This is just frustrating.
It's just not true. It's not
representative of how Jehovah's
Witnesses have been treated historically
around the world. whether or not this is
true and how Jehovah's Witnesses
that minor Jehovah's Witnesses who had
been excluded were treated in Norway,
you know, between 2020 and 2025.
Maybe it is representative of that. And
I think we'll get into that here in a
second. Uh 99. In my view, the
guidelines for handling a possible
exclusion of a minor mean that the
process appears more gentle than
previously, which I don't think it
appears more gentle. I think it is more
gentle than it was. Uh, nevertheless, it
must be possible to assume that it can
be both uncomfortable and humiliating
for a child to have to explain the
accusations to the elders of the
congregation, often with the parents
present present, especially if the
matter concerns relationships of an
intimate or sensitive nature. I
nevertheless find the process itself
does not constitute mental violence
according to the convention rights of
the child article 19.
uh here in number 100. However, the
child will still be part of the nuclear
family and he or she will normally be
able to have contact with family members
and friends who do not belong to the
religious community. In my view, it is
significant in this context that
Jehovah's Witnesses do not run their own
schools. The minor will thus be able to
have a network outside the congregation,
although the scope of this may be
limited in practice as the religious
community encourages its members to
avoid unnecessary contact with young
children outside the congregation. This
one was also mildly infuriating because
again I feel like this misunderstands
what people's experience has been. Just
because there's not official Jehovah's
Witness schools does not mean that they
have a social network outside of the
organization. These two things aren't
related. I I don't even understand the
logic behind that. Oh, well, they don't
operate schools, so therefore they make
friends and they they participate in
school sports. They go have afterchool
activities. They invite their friends
who aren't Jehovah's Witnesses over for
lunch and cookies and cupcakes. None of
that happens. None of it happens at all.
They don't have a network outside of it.
That is in in talking to people who are
leaving the organization. One of the
most difficult problems they face is,
well, now I don't have a support system.
Now I don't have any friends. I don't
have anything. I'm just left out here,
you know, with my balls in my hand to
figure it out on my own because I had no
one outside of the organization. So
again, this completely misunderstands
Jehovah's Witness life in general. 103.
Given the potential that exclusion
practices have for affected minors
mental health, I would not rule out that
children's rights could be considered
violated in individual cases. Although
there is so far only information that
one minor has been excluded since 2021.
The assessment of children's rights
could be changed if exclusion practices
of a certain extent can be demonstrated.
Such documentation is not available in
our case.
This is like
I don't know. Is this just focusing on
the wrong thing or is this just
legal systems
doing their their best to figure
something that's complicated out? I I
struggle with this.
You know, there's one one case of of a
kid being excluded in all of Norway, you
know, in the last five years.
I can imagine that it's hard to sit
there and look at this as like a
national problem that has to be
addressed that has to go in like if if
you're just looking at it as like stats,
figures, and numbers and you're not
intimately connected a and you haven't
taken the time, I suppose, to like
really understand the Jehovah's Witness
culture and how it functions and
operates and works and you're just
looking at the numbers.
I could see a world where seeing one
dysfellowship removed minor in five
years would be like, well, if this seems
like it's a more systemic problem that's
affecting a lot of people, you know,
maybe we would have to re, you know,
look into this. But is that really worth
all of this stuff? Like if you're
looking at okay well they have a rule
where it says that you know it's mostly
handled with parents and they're just
kind of get a threemonth ban as long as
they say I'm sorry there's only been one
who's been kicked out in the last you
know if you're looking at it in the way
that they're presenting this I can kind
of sort of see how someone might trick
themselves into thinking that the
Jehovah's Witnesses have done nothing
wrong. I can see how that might happen.
Do I agree? Absolutely not. But I can at
least kind of see it. Now, uh, number
125. The practice does not mean that
family ties are broken. Again, crap.
I've already dealt with the consequences
for miners in the discussion of whether
children's rights are violated. I
content myself here with reminding that
the practice of ostracism does not apply
to family members. Typically, children
and young people who live in the same
household.
That's just not true.
It's just yeah, it's just I mean they
say that's how it works, but that's not
how it works in in practice or in
reality. 128 D registration therefore
does not entail total social isolation,
not even from the family.
Man, my left butt cheek's getting some
work today. Holy. Yeah. Again, my left
butt cheek. I that's an un that is an
unbelievable sentence to read as someone
who's not even dysfellowshipped
and has zero nothing burger absolute
even before I was a full-blown apostate
nothing absolutely nothing just for
stepping away it is total social
isolation they didn't even tell me that
my grandma was sick and wanted to see me
before she died.
Like that's how crazy and fanatical and
extreme these people are. So to paint
the sentences that they say where oh
normal family life continues. You tell
my story to a thousand people and 1,000
people will come back to you and say
that is not family ties not being
broken. That is not a normal family
situation. That is not even, you know,
necessary family business. Even under
Watchtower's rules where it says
necessary family business, I would
imagine that the death of a family
member would be necessary family
business, but not to a Jehovah's
Witness. So that again is just absolute
crap. Uh members of the Jehovah's
Witnesses are cons are consistently
socially integrated in Norwegian
society. The children go to ordinary
schools. Adults get education and
participate in work in other social
activities. What other social activities
like getting coffee? It also is
significant in Jehovah's Witnesses are
relatively small community with around
12,000 members spread across the
country. The dregistered person is thus
located not in a situation where he or
she is banned from a religious community
that constitutes a dominant majority of
the immediate environment. So, so that a
religious ostracism entails a real risk
of general social ostracism.
Yeah, sure.
But support structures are built over
time. And when you lose those support
structures, it takes time to rebuild
them. Not everyone has sufficient
fortitude to rebuild those connections
that matter, that give you stability in
your life. And I think and I would argue
that it does put people in serious
life-threatening danger to be completely
socially isolated when they leave
Jehovah's Witnesses because like I said,
they don't have anyone outside. And uh
number 139, my view is in line with
comparable decisions in other countries.
is the Jehovah's Witness practice of
social ostracism which according to the
information is the same across national
borders has also been tested by higher
courts in Germany, Belgium, Italy, the
United States and Canada among others.
Despite different legal starting points,
the result has consistently been the
same. The practice is not considered a
violation neither of the rights of
former members nor of the right of
remaining members to freely leave the
religious community.
Uh and then they talk about a German
constitutional court case from 2000.
Among other things, the court emphasized
that it was not sufficient to refer to
the teachings of the religious
community. The actual consequences had
to be mapped out and assessed.
The authorities state that the practice
of Jehovah's Witnesses, among other
things, prevented members from opting
out for fear of social isolation and
that former members were denied contact
with children in the religious
community. After numerous nationwide
investigations, the court concluded that
there was no evidence of any of the
state's claims.
This one's just like hard to to get my
head around. I don't know if it's like a
mobilization
flaw with ex Jehovah's Witnesses
where it would be hard to
to map out
the the damages of
of shunning.
I don't know. I don't know. I think the
idea that they're leaning on
legal precedent, you know, that's been
established
around the world is infuriating because
this case,
at least personally, felt like a breath
of fresh air.
And it felt as you know hearing the
state's arguments against the
organization, it felt like they really
understood
what was going on and didn't buy any of
the Watchtower lies that they and ways
that they try and spin it. And I guess
this thing here in Germany was the same.
after trying to figure it out, they were
like, "Yeah, we can't really find any
evidence of the state's claims that, you
know, prevented them or used fear of
social isolation."
I think it's crazy to say that you can't
look at just what the organization says.
You actually have to try and map out
what like the damages and consequences
of it. I I feel like that's missing the
point, but again, I'm not a legal
expert, so maybe that's the most
important thing. Uh, in conclusion, I
would like to point out that in a number
of decisions of the ECTR has emphasized
the absolutely crucial importance of
freedom of religion in a democratic
society based on pluralism and respect
for cultural diversity. In this sense,
freedom of religion also safeguards the
uniqueness of the individual religious
communities. I don't care. I seriously
could care less about preserving the
individual identity of religious
communities if those religious
communities can be shown to do harm. And
I think through this whole process is I
think the court would agree that the
witnesses do harm in principle, but
maybe it was just hard for them to
establish if it happens like as a matter
of fact. I don't I don't know.
I don't know. Anyway, that's about all
my brain can handle. So, we'll get into
the ones that uh rejected or that did
not sign with Watchtower the two the two
because it was like I said 3-2 split.
But yeah, that's all my brain can handle
for the minute. I'll be completely
honest with you. This is super
frustrating to get through. Like I said,
I am going to go and touch some grass. I
encourage
you to do the same as well. So, thank
you so much for watching this and stay
safe, be kind, and don't forget to spend
more time loving the things you love
than hating the things you hate.
Don't forget to spend more time loving
the things you love than hating the
things you hate. Now go out there and
have a good ass day.